website/integrations: add FortiGate SSL VPN and Admin Login (#9105)
goauthentik/authentik: website/integrations/services/fortigate-ssl/index.md

`diag debug application samld -1`

### Debug sslvpn (optional)

This will provide insight into what happens when you use FortiClient, usually combined with `salmd debug`.
`diag debug application sslvpn -1`

### Debug https daemon (optional)

This can be used to see what calls are made when using the SSLVPN portal. Note this will also catch any admins working on the firewall and can get a bit messy.\
`diag debug application httpsd -1`

### Enable debug timestamps (optional)

Provides timestamp on the debug output lines\
`diagnose debug console timestamp enable`

### Error: Assertion failed with url

This could be caused by a time difference between SP and IDP

### Error: Assertion failed with 'coin'

You have not set the audience in the SAML provider settings

### Error: Redirection loop

This could be caused by the `fgt.user.group` not being added to any firewall rules.

### Error: Redirected to logout page on authentik when logging in

User group `fgt.user.group` is not mapped to any portals ( Fortigate settings page 'SSL-VPN Settings'), and your default catch all does not allow access to either portal or tunnel.

### Error: authentik page shows "missing post data"

> An error message abouit missing data is displayed by authentik. This error means you have used the wrong `idp-single-sign-on-url` and most likely the wrong `idp-single-logout-url` in the FortiGate SAML SP configuration. These should be the redirect URLs from authentik's provider configuration and not the post URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An error message about missing data is displayed by authentik. This error means you have used the wrong `idp-single-sign-on-url` and most likely the wrong `idp-single-logout-url` in the FortiGate SAML SP configuration. These should be the redirect URLs from authentik's provider configuration and not the post URLs.
```

---
title: FortiGate SSLVPN
---

<span class="badge badge--secondary">Support level: Community</span>

## FortiGate SSLVPN

> FortiGate is a firewall from FortiNet. It is a NGFW with layer7 inspection and able to become a part of a FortiNet security fabric.
> -- https://www.fortinet.com/products/next-generation-firewall
>

> > This guide explains how to setup a FortiGate to use authentik as SAML provider for SSLVPN authentication. It does not cover how to setup SAML for admin logins, that is a different configuration. If you need to setup SAML for admin logins see the FortiGate admin guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This guide explains how to setup a FortiGate to use authentik with a SAML provider for SSLVPN authentication. It does not cover how to setup SAML for admin logins, that is a different configuration. If you need to setup SAML for admin logins see the FortiGate admin guide.
```

Reviewer: @nicedevil007 @DragonWin by "Fortigate admin guide" do you mean the FortiGate official docs, or the other file in the PR? Let's add a link to the other file, if that is what you mean.

Reviewer 2: It should have been a reference to the guide done by @nicedevil007 (admin guide), the documentation from FortiNet focus mostly on Azure integration and integration with their own products, which are not applicable to setting up SAML with authentik.

>
> This guide has been created using the following software versions. Instructions may differ between versions.
>
> -   Fortigate: 7.2.8
> -   authentik: 2024.2.2

## Assumptions

> -   You know how to configure an SSLVPN in a FortiGate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   You know how to configure an SSLVPN in a FortiGate.
```

> -   You have already a certificate for signing and encryption uploaded to both authentik and the FortiGate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   You already have a certificate for signing and encryption uploaded to both authentik and the FortiGate.
```

-   You already have a working SSLVPN (either portal or tunnel) and is just changing authentication from what you are using today to authentik SAML.

The following placeholders will be used:

-   `saml.sp.name` = The name that will be the SAML SP configuration in the FortiGate

> -   `fgt.cert` = Fortigate certificate for signig and encrypting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `fgt.cert` = Fortigate certificate for signing and encrypting
```

-   `service.company` = This is the FQDN of the firewall, if your sslvpn portal is not on TCP port 443, then add the port like: fortigate.mydomain.tld:10233
-   `authentik.company` = This is the FQDN of your authentik installation
-   `app.slug.name` = The application slug that you decided upon
-   `ak.cert` = The authentik remote certificate you have uploaded before starting the guide.
-   `fgt.user.group` = This will be the name of the user group in your Fortigate that you will use in your SSLVPN portal mapping and Firewall rules
-   `ak.user.group` = This is the user group name that you will use in authentik if you plan on limiting access to the sslvpn via groups.

## FortiGate configuration

### Preparation

-   Decide on an application name (slug) e.g. fgtsslvpn that you will use in authentik later.

### Setup SAML SP

> 1.  ssh to the Fortigate (If you are using vdom change to the correct vdom)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  SSH to the Fortigate (If you are using vdom change to the correct vdom).
```

> 2.  copy the config below to your prefered editor and change the placeholders to your settings, then paste it into the Fortigate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  Copy the config below to your preferred editor and change the placeholders to your settings, then paste it into the Fortigate.
```

> [!NOTE]
> Some are https and some are http, that is on purpose, and as described by FortiNet.

```
config user saml
    edit "saml.sp.name"
        set cert "fgt.cert"
        set entity-id "http://service.company/remote/saml/metadata/"
        set single-sign-on-url "https://service.company/remote/saml/login"
        set single-logout-url "https://service.company/remote/saml/logout"
        set idp-entity-id "https://authentik.company"
        set idp-single-sign-on-url "https://authentik.company/application/saml/app.slug.name/sso/binding/redirect/"
        set idp-single-logout-url "https://authentik.company/application/saml/app.slug.name/slo/binding/redirect/"
        set idp-cert "ak.cert"
        set user-name "http://schemas.goauthentik.io/2021/02/saml/username"
        set group-name "http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/claims/Group"
        set digest-method sha256
    next
end
```

> ### Add the saml single signon to a use group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add the SAML single sign-on to a user group
```

> This will limit who can login via authentik saml. It will match on ak.user.group which is the group you will setup in authentik later, and only allow users of that group to login. In essence it provides the same functionality as returning a user-group via radius, and matching on the user group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will limit who can login via authentik SAML. It will match on `ak.user.group` which is the group you will set up in authentik later, and only allow users of that group to login. In essence it provides the same functionality as returning a user-group via Radius, and matching on the user group.
```

```
config user group
    edit "fgt.user.group"
        set member "saml.sp.name"
        config match
            edit 1
                set server-name "saml.sp.name"
                set group-name "ak.user.group"
            next
        end
    next
end
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> If you created a new firewall group, instead of using an existing sslvpn firewall group, then remember to map it to a portal in the 'SSL-VPN Settings' page, and add the `fgt.user.group` to firewall rules, or you will be redirected back to authentik with a logout immediately upon each login attempt.

> Next get the meta data from the FortiGate to help us with the SAML configuration in authentik. Copy all the output from the command below and save it in a xml file named fgt-metadata.xml. You will upload that to authentik later, so we get a lot of the configuration set for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next get the meta data from the FortiGate to help us with the SAML configuration in authentik. Copy all the output from the command below and save it in a xml file named `fgt-metadata.xml`. You will upload that to authentik later, to facilitate auto-configuration.
```

```
diag vpn ssl saml-metadata saml.sp.name
```

## authentik setup

> It's time to login to authentik and setup the provider and application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's time to log in to authentik and set up the provider and application.
```

## Provider section

> Lets setup the provider using the saml metadata from the FortiGate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's set up the provider using the SAML metadata from the FortiGate.
```

> ### Setup the Provider using metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Setup the provider using metadata
```

> -   Go to Applications -> Providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Go to **Applications -> Providers**.
```

> -   Click Create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Click **Create**.
```

> -   Chose "SAML Provider from Metadata" at the bottom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Select **SAML Provider from Metadata** at the bottom.
```

    -   Name: Name it something appropriate e.g. FGT SSL SAML Provider
    -   Authorization flow: default-provider-authorization-implicit-consent (Authorize Application)
    -   Metadata: upload the fgt-metadata.xml you created previously

> -   Finish

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Click **Finish**.
```

### Validate and change settings for provider

> -   Click on the action button to the right of the provider you just created to edit it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Click the Edit icon to the right of the provider you just created, under the **Actions** column..
```

-   Description = None
-   Save

### Limiting the access based on authentik group

-   Open the application again
-   Click on "Policy / Group / User Binding"
-   Click bind existing policy
-   Click on the "TAB" Group at the top
-   Click on Select an object next to Group
-   Chose ak.user.group
-   Make sure enabled is chosen
-   Order = 10
-   Timeout = 30
-   Failure result = Don't pass
-   Click create

You should now be able to login by selecting SSO login either on the portal or in FortiClient, depending on your portal configuration.

> [!NOTE]
> If you are using FortiClient remember to set the sslvpn profile to use single-signon either creating a manual profile or edit the profile in your EMS.

## Troubleshooting

These are just suggestions of what **could** be the cause of an issue and how to enable debug on the FortiGate

> [!CAUTION]
> Debugging can generate heavy load on a FortiGate firewall, so make sure your firewall is not already struggling with performance before you enable debugging, and remember to disabled it again when you are done.
>
> You can disable the debug with these commands.
> `diag debug disable` > `diag debug reset`

### Enabling debug output

> Before you can see any output you need to enable the debug

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can see any output you need to enable the debug mode.
```

Reviewer 2: I can't see how I can make a comment for line 194, but I would prefer that each debug command is on a new line. I am not sure if this is just because of the formatting in the diff here, or it will actually be like that when the guide is done.

> You can disable the debug with these commands.
> `diag debug disable`
> `diag debug reset`

ps. As you can probably tell, I am not used to working with commits on github (or markdown that others should read), hence why nicedevil007 make the PR for both of us. If there are any question you have asked that I have missed, feel free to throw a url or just ask me on Discord (Prestien), and I'll do my best to provide an answer.

Author: I agree with @DragonWin here, useuall you copy/paste those commands into the fortigates CLI (this one has a slightly different behaviour than a all known Bash CLI). I would prefer the 2 line part.

`diagnose debug enable`

### Debug saml daemon

> This will provide all possible output from the saml daemon.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will provide all possible output from the SAML daemon.
```

`diag debug application samld -1`

### Debug sslvpn (optional)

> This will provide insight into what happens when you use FortiClient, usually combined with salmd debug.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will provide insight into what happens when you use FortiClient, usually combined with `salmd debug`.
```

Reviewer: I'm not actually sure if the backslashes are intentional? Is this a way to format spacing?

Reviewer 2: It was to have the quoted command on the next line, so each debug command would be more visable, and the explanation would be a kind of heading for it.

Author: Haha :D DragonWin did it inline before we decided to make it in a seperate line. But at the end it doesn't matter, we thought it is better for a random user to read it as the command itself if it is on the next line.

`diag debug application sslvpn -1`

### Debug https daemon (optional)

This can be used to see what calls are made when using the SSLVPN portal. Note this will also catch any admins working on the firewall and can get a bit messy.\
`diag debug application httpsd -1`

### Enable debug timestamps (optional)

Provides timestamp on the debug output lines\
`diagnose debug console timestamp enable`

### Error: Assertion failed with url

This could be caused by a time difference between SP and IDP

### Error: Assertion failed with 'coin'

You have not set the audience in the SAML provider settings

### Error: Redirection loop

This could be caused by the `fgt.user.group` not being added to any firewall rules.

### Error: Redirected to logout page on authentik when logging in

User group `fgt.user.group` is not mapped to any portals ( Fortigate settings page 'SSL-VPN Settings'), and your default catch all does not allow access to either portal or tunnel.

### Error: authentik page shows "missing post data"

> I can't remember the exact error message shown by authentik, but it will complain about missing data. this means you have used the wrong `idp-single-sign-on-url` and most likely the wrong `idp-single-logout-url` in the FortiGate SAML SP configuration. These should be the redirect url's from authentik's Provider configuration and not the post url's.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An error message abouit missing data is displayed by authentik. This error means you have used the wrong `idp-single-sign-on-url` and most likely the wrong `idp-single-logout-url` in the FortiGate SAML SP configuration. These should be the redirect URLs from authentik's provider configuration and not the post URLs.
```
